Your purpose is the reason you are here on
Earth.
It’s the thing that you were built for.
So it’s an incredibly important thing to
figure out, because it’s the thing that
guides you.
Without a purpose, you’re lost.
You have no North Star.
Your life will feel meaningless.
And so today I’m going to talk about how
to discover your purpose according to the
philosophy of Carl Jung.
While writing what is now widely considered
his central work, The Red Book, Jung discovered
the purpose of his own life.
But he didn’t just discover the purpose
of his own life.
He also discovered where purpose comes from
for all of us.
And based on my understanding of The Red Book,
Jung says that your purpose is found in performing
voluntary self-sacrifice.
What would you willingly sacrifice yourself
for?
This means that your purpose isn’t found
in money, car, clothes, status, or any other
self-serving pleasure, but rather, your purpose
is found in the thing that you would willingly
suffer for.
Your purpose lies in serving something that
you deem as greater and more valuable than
your own existence.
But what if you can’t find anything greater
or more valuable than your own existence?
Then you will experience life as meaningless
and empty.
A modern proverb states that life only promises
us two things: death and taxes.
And what does that mean?
It means that life demands a sacrifice from
us all.
Death and taxes are both a form of self-sacrifice.
All life is born to be sacrificed in some
way.
We’re not getting out of this thing called
life without sacrificing ourselves.
Even the food that we eat is, in some way,
sacrificed for our own continued existence.
And so if you have nothing greater than yourself
to sacrifice your time and energy for, you
end up investing all your life force into
yourself.
But since you eventually have to be sacrificed,
all the energy that you invest in yourself
essentially just goes to waste.
And so if all your energy is just going to
be wasted, that makes your life meaningless.
Without a North Star or purpose outside of
yourself, your life just becomes empty and
meaningless suffering.
But if you find something worth sacrificing
yourself for, worth serving and dedicating
your life too, then your suffering becomes
meaningful, and when your suffering becomes
meaningful, in some way, as both Friedrich
Nietzsche and Viktor Frankl have noted, it
ceases to be suffering.
And you know this idea is true when you see
it.
If you see someone willing to sacrifice themselves
for something greater than themselves, you
tend to think that they’ve found their purpose.
When Socrates was imprisoned by his people,
he had a chance to run and escape.
But he willingly sacrificed himself for the
principles of truth, justice, and honor.
By sacrificing his own life, he believed that
he was doing what was necessary to serve his
city: Athens.
Jesus willingly sacrificed himself for the
good of humanity.
And Cato, who in some ways can be thought
of as the Roman Socrates, sacrificed his life
as a final resistance against Caesar’s rule,
because he refused to serve under someone
he viewed as a tyrant.
He sacrificed himself for the principles of
liberty and freedom.
And regardless of what you think of these
three names, there’s one thing you can’t
deny: these men all had a purpose.
They were on a mission.
And the reason you know that is because they
all found something more important than themselves
that they thought it was worth sacrificing
their own lives for.
But we don’t need to go to big historic
examples to find people who found something
worth sacrificing themselves for.
This happens everyday.
There are mothers who sacrifice themselves
for their children, missionaries for their
church, cops for justice, activists for equality,
and soldiers for freedom.
Every day, people find something worth sacrificing
themselves for, and by doing so, they discover
their own purpose.
So what does it look like to implement Carl
Jung’s wisdom of voluntary self-sacrifice
into our own lives?
We can take it day by day and dedicate ourselves
to the service of others in a way we would
be willing to do.
We can serve others in a way that we would
want to serve them, in a way that we would
be happy to wake up each day and do.
We can create something that we would be willing
to completely sacrifice ourselves for, because
eventually, we will be forced to.
That is what life demands of us all.
But if you don’t discover your purpose,
your life becomes a forced sacrifice, and
a forced sacrifice is felt as tyrannical and
oppressive.
You’ll start to experience life as a great
evil.
But if you discover your purpose, your life
becomes a voluntary sacrifice.
And a voluntary sacrifice, such as that of
a mother for her child, is felt as incredibly
meaningful.
And so if you discover your purpose, you will
experience life as incredibly meaningful and
good.
So I’ll ask again: what would you willingly
sacrifice yourself for?
That’s where your purpose lies.