Well I'll tell you a couple of strange things that the things that I don't really understand the first is when we've done the analysis
Of the effects of the future authoring program it has had a different
It's differential impact on men and it's had a particularly
differential impact on what I would call excluded men, and so that would be non-western ethnic minority men or
or
What?
Majority, man who are doing very well so for example at Mohawk College
The future authoring program had a particularly robust effect on
Mohawk College students who were men who hadn't done very well in high school
And who hadn't picked a major that had a destination a career destination at its end
so you can imagine those people are they have an ambiguous relationship with the idea of education and
They're not oriented specifically towards a goal. They're not very motivated
Now why did it have a differential effect on men?
That's a good question
Well first of all the women are doing better
so
It might just be a matter of the fact that it does better for people who aren't doing as well and at the moment most
Of them are men
I don't believe I think that might be part of it, but I don't believe that's all of it
I think that part of the reason that women are doing better is cuz they're agreeable and
So if a system sets out a structure and says here's a pathway to attainment
The women won't rebel against that they'll go along with it and that's working very well for them at the moment
the men especially the men on the disagreeable end of the distribution
And there's way more men on the district disagreeable end of the distribution, then there are women right
That's what you get from if you look at overlapping normal distributions, so there's the male district female distribution for agreeableness
male distribution for agreeableness tremendous overlap
Okay, women are higher all the really agreeable people are women all the really disagreeable people are men
And maybe the real differences occur at the extremes right so so and it's it's a very interesting side effect of overlapping
Distributions, so they people can be mostly the same
But that can still produce
radical differences
Disagreeable men won't do anything they don't want to do
They just say up yours I'll go home and play video games
With you no. I'm not listening to your stupid and
Why should I work for you? I'll just go have fun
I'll do my own thing
I don't think they're motivated and so then if you take the men who are like that and you say, okay. What do you want?
You can have what you want
But you have to figure out what it is
So then they write down what they want they think oh hey well that might be worth having so maybe I'll put some effort into
It that's what it looks like to me now
You know that's weak evidence, and this is a weak argument, but I'm trying to stretch out my understanding to account for this
But I'll tell you something else that's really weird. I don't understand this either, so
More than 90% of the people who watch my videos on YouTube are men now
that's weird because not about 80% of psychology students are women so that is not what you would expect right you would expect that the
Majority of them would be women and you might say well
it's because of the political stance I've taken and I thought well that's possible so I went looked at the demographic data because I have
That well before I did any of the political videos
85% of my viewers were men so it's actually increased a bit, it's increased by 6% and that's not trivial
But it was still overwhelmingly men, so that was interesting. I thought what the hell
why is that exactly and then now I've been watching crowds when I've been talking to them and
The crowds that have come to see me in person this happened at the University of Toronto free speech debate
and I actually noticed it and
Commented on it before the debate took place because I was talking about intrinsic differences between men and women and I looked around the room
And I thought hmm hey 80% of the people in this room are men
So I had all the men's women and women stand up and then all the men stand up
I said look like here's a natural experiment
For some reason 80% of the people who showed up to this or men now everybody thought
I was kind of cracked to to do that and it was a risk
You know what and all right, but I thought no weather something going on here
And then what's interesting now is that every public appearance that I've made that's related to the sort of topics that we're discussing is
Overwhelmingly men it's like it's like
85 to 90%
And so I thought wow that's weird like what the hell's going on here exactly, and then the other thing. I've noticed is that?
I've been talking a lot to the crowds that I've been talking to not about rights
But about responsibility right because he can't have the bloody. What are you doing? You can't have the conversation about rights without the
conversation about responsibility because your rights are my
Responsibility that's what they are technically so you just can't have only half of that discussion
And we're only having half that discussion and the question is well
What the hell are you leaving out if you only have that half of the discussion and the answer is what you're leaving out
Responsibility and then the question is well
What are you leaving out if you're leaving out responsibility and the answer might be well, maybe you're leaving out the meaning of life
That's what it looks like to me. It's like here you are
Suffering away, what makes it worthwhile, right?
you know you're completely out you're completely you have no idea what you're
You it's almost impossible to describe how bad an idea that is
Responsibility
That's what gives life meaning
It's like lift a load
Then you can tolerate yourself right because look at your useless
Easily hurt easily killed. Why should you have any self-respect?
That's the story of the fall
Pick something up and carry it pick make it heavy enough so that you can think yeah well
Useless as I am at least I could move that from there to there well
What's really cool about that is that when I talk to these crowds about this the man's eyes light up, and that's very good
I've seen that phenomena because I've been talking about this mythological material for a long time and I can see when I'm watching crowds people
You know their eyebrows lift their eyes let light up because I put something together for them. That's what mythological stories
Do so I'm not taking responsibility for that
That's what the stories do so I save the story people go click click click
You know in their eyes light up, but this responsibility thing
That's a whole new order of this is that young men are so hungry for that it is unbelievable
And one of the things I've been talking to some of the people who've been
Running for the conservative leadership in Canada, and I've been talking to them about well the difficulties
They have communicating with young people because conservatives
What what the hell are they going to sell to young people right because being conservative is something that happens when you're older they can
sell responsibility
No, one's selling it and the thing is for men. There's nothing about responsibility
You know I was watching The Simpsons the other day
I watched the first Simpsons episode
And I deconstructed it and so it's really interesting so what happens in the first Simpson episode is that?
It's Christmas and homer and Marge are going to buy some Christmas presents, but Homer doesn't get his Christmas bonus
And so he's absolutely crushed by that and that
Actually is a recurring theme in The Simpsons where Homer loses his job or something like that or can tonight make enough money
He's completely crushed even though he's kind of useless bumbling
Laughing fool of a guy. You know the thing that gives that show its soul is that he's still oriented towards his family
That's what makes him honorable is that?
Foolish as he is he's decided to adopt
Responsibility for his family and to try to bear that and so he's not he's a holy fool
He's not a complete fool
And it's so interesting watching the story because he suffers dreadfully as a consequence of not being able to fulfill his responsibilities well
That's for men
Women have their sets of responsibilities. They're not the same
Right because they're complicated because women of course have to take primary
Responsibility for for having infants at least but then also for caring for them there they're structured differently than men
For biological necessity even if it's not a psychological issue and it's also partly a psychological issue women know what they have to do
men have to figure out what they have to do, and if they have nothing worth living for then they stay Peter Pat and
Why the hell not?
because the alternative to valued responsibility is
Impulsive
low-class
Pleasure and you saw that in the Pinocchio story right that's Pleasure Island, it's like well
Why lift the load if there's nothing in it for you?
That's another thing that we're doing to men. That's a very bad idea and to boys it's like
You're pathological and oppressive. It's like fine. Then why the hell am I going to play
That's that if that's the situation if I get no credit for bearing responsibility
It could bloody well be sure I'm not going to bear it
but then you know your life is useless and meaningless and you have you're not you're full of self-contempt and nihilism and and
That's not good, and so that's why I think all right
That's what I think's going
At a deeper level with regards to men needing this direction a man has to decide that he's going to do something
He has to decide that yeah, well. You know partly what you're trying to do in the future authoring processes say, okay well
What's your highest value?
Right it's the star. It's like. Okay. What are you aiming for you can decide man, but you know there's some criteria
It should be good for you. It should be good for you in a way that facilitates your moving forward
Maybe it should be good for you in a way. That's also good for the family in the community it should cover the the
domain of life I mean there's constraints on what you should regard as a value, but you but within those constraints you have the
Choice you have choice
Well the thing is is that people will carry a heavy load if they get to pick the goddamn load
So and they think well I won't carry any load
It's like okay fine
But then you're like the sled dog that doesn't have a sled to pull you're just gonna
You're gonna tear pieces out of your own legs because you're bored. You know you need people are pack animals
They need they need to pull against a weight, and and that's not true for everyone
it's not true particularly say for low conscientious people I mean maybe they're open and creative or extroverted and some other things but for the
for the typical person
They'll eat themselves they'll eat themselves up unless they have a load this is why there's such an opiate epidemic among
Dispossessed white middle-aged guys who are unemployed in the u.s.. It's like they lose their job. They're done
Right they despise themselves. They develop chronic pain syndromes and depression and the chronic pain is treated with opiates
It's like that's what we're doing so
Yeah, that's what it looks like to me is you you have to and it's so interesting to watch the young men when you talk
To them about responsibility, there's a god damn thrilled about it. It just blows me away. It's like really. That's what's that's the counterculture
Grow the hell up and do something useful really I could do that oh
I'm so excited by that idea no one ever mentioned that before it's like rights rights rights rights Jesus
It's it's it's appalling. It's a it's and and I feel that that's deeply felt by the people who are who are coming out to
To listen to these sorts of things - they're they've had enough of that
So and they better have because it's it's a non-productive mode of being
Responsibility man that's where the meeting in life is so